docs/index.rst, before:

.. roms-tools documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Fri Jun  7 15:20:27 2024.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to the ROMS-Tools Documentation!
========================================

**ROMS-Tools** is a Python package designed for creating the input files necessary
to run a `ROMS <https://github.com/CESR-lab/ucla-roms>`_ or ROMS-MARBL simulation. This tool simplifies the process of generating:

- **Grid**
- **Tidal forcing**
- **Surface forcing**:

  - Physical/Meteorological forcing: wind, radiation, etc.
  - Biogeochemical forcing: atmospheric pCO₂, etc.

- **Initial conditions**:

  - Physical conditions: temperature, velocities, etc.
  - Biogeochemical conditions: alkalinity, etc.

- **Boundary forcing**:

  - Physical forcing: temperature, velocities, etc.
  - Biogeochemical forcing: alkalinity, etc.

- **River forcing**:

  - Physical forcing: river volume flux, river temperature, river salinity

- **Nesting**

This Python package is inspired by the `UCLA MATLAB tools <https://github.com/nmolem/ucla-tools/tree/main>`_.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Getting Started

   installation
   methods
   datasets

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Examples

   Creating a grid <grid>
   Creating tidal forcing <tides>
   Creating surface forcing <surface_forcing>
   Creating initial conditions <initial_conditions>
   Creating boundary forcing <boundary_forcing>
   Creating river forcing <river_forcing>
   Preparing nested simulations <nesting>
   Analyzing ROMS output <roms_output>

   Partitioning the input files <partition>
   Using ROMS-Tools with Dask <using_dask>


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: For Developers

   contributing
   releases

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: References

   references
   api

Commit message:

Vertical profile plots of `ROMSOutput` at lat/lon location (#277)
* Rename LateralRegrid to LateralRegridToROMS

* Add new class for lateral regridding from ROMS

* Linting

* Thicker lines in line plots

* Refactor ROMSOutput.plot() to accommodate plotting at lat, lon, depth

* Function that validates plot inputs

* Linting

* Modify plot title

* Update notebook with new plots

* Correct correctness checks for plotting

* Clean up and complete analysis plotting tests

* Change to new name

* Add tests for lateral regridding with xesmf

* Split plotting tests into with and without xesmf requirement

* Conda environment with xesmf

* Test suite with xesmf

* Update README

* Some cosmetics in README

* Update installation instructions

* Exclude warning banner in docs

* Better installation instructions

* Restructure landing page

* Add to release notes

* Shorten captions

* Correct docstrings

* Linting

docs/index.rst, after:

.. roms-tools documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Fri Jun  7 15:20:27 2024.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to the ROMS-Tools Documentation!
========================================

**ROMS-Tools** is a Python package designed for creating the input files necessary
to run a `UCLA-ROMS <https://github.com/CESR-lab/ucla-roms>`_ simulation, with or without MARBL. This tool simplifies the process of generating:

- **Grid**
- **Tidal forcing**
- **Surface forcing**:

  - Physical/Meteorological forcing: wind, radiation, etc.
  - Biogeochemical forcing: atmospheric pCO₂, etc.

- **Initial conditions**:

  - Physical conditions: temperature, velocities, etc.
  - Biogeochemical conditions: alkalinity, etc.

- **Boundary forcing**:

  - Physical forcing: temperature, velocities, etc.
  - Biogeochemical forcing: alkalinity, etc.

- **River forcing**:

  - Physical forcing: river volume flux, river temperature, river salinity

- **Nesting**

Additionally, it provides several analysis tools.

This Python package is inspired by the `UCLA MATLAB tools <https://github.com/nmolem/ucla-tools/tree/main>`_.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Getting Started

   installation
   methods
   datasets

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Preparing a UCLA-ROMS Simulation

   Creating a grid <grid>
   Creating tidal forcing <tides>
   Creating surface forcing <surface_forcing>
   Creating initial conditions <initial_conditions>
   Creating boundary forcing <boundary_forcing>
   Creating river forcing <river_forcing>
   Preparing nested simulations <nesting>
   Partitioning the input files <partition>

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Analyzing a UCLA-ROMS Simulation

   Analyzing ROMS output <roms_output>

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Advanced Topics

   Using ROMS-Tools with Dask <using_dask>


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: For Developers

   contributing
   releases

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: References

   references
   api
